well the German Chancellor Olaf Schultz
has warned Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu against his plans for
that ground offensive and Rafa the two
leaders met in West Jerusalem and
Schultz urged Netanyahu to protect
civilians in Gaza and also highlighted
the need for humanitarian Aid he says
the world cannot stand by as
Palestinians risk
starvation the longer the war lasts the
higher the number of Civilian casualties
Rises the more desperate the situation
of the people in have become the more
this backs the question no matter how
important the goal can it justify such
terribly high costs or are there other
ways to achieve your
goal take the ground of fensive in
Rafa the military logic is one
consideration but there is a
humanitarian logic as well how should
more than 1.5 million people be
protected where should they go
we've just had uh uh I think a very
serious conversation an important
conversation among friends uh you
express your concern for two things one
protecting civilians and second uh
provision of humanitarian Aid and I
explain that these are our concerns as
well uh because we agree with both goals
leaders and Egypt are also warning
against Israel's plannned offensive and
Rafa Egyptian president Abdul fat CI met
the European commission president Ela V
Deion in Cairo there she announced an8
billion Aid package for cash strapped
Egypt some of that money will be used to
secure borders and to limit the flow of
migrants we are all extremely concerned
about the war in Gaza and the unfolding
catastrophic humanitarian
situation Gaza is facing F and it is
critical to achieve an agreement on the
ceasefire Rue now that frees the
hostages and allows more humanitarian
Aid to
reacha and we are very concerned about
the risks of full scale offensive in ra
that would be devastating for vulner
civilian well let's bring in rck
Brookner he is a professor of European
studies at Stanford University in Berlin
he joins us live from there now oric it
feels like we've seen quite the shift
from V and I remember when she flew to
Israel in those days after October 7th
and then also given the history very
strong words from Schultz what is behind
this shift is this about public
opinion no I think one has to
differentiate from the very first
beginning we had more than a year of a
European Union criticizing what's going
on in Israel and in Nan's government in
particular about Democratic backsliding
and there were criticism about
corruption cases and the criticism kept
going and the differentiation was always
present when either the foreign minister
of Germany or the chancellor talked to
high officials of the Israeli government
and the way it was portrayed in Arab
media was its black and white Germany
stands side by side with Israel and
backs whatever violation of
international law this is not the case
so therefore it's not a swing to the
other end but maybe the tone became much
more explicit but the differentiation
has always been part of the German and
the European Union political position
well it was interesting to see the tone
of this press conference that just took
place Netanyahu was saying this was a
and I'm quoting it serious but important
conversation amongst friends what is
actually being said behind closed doors
how much influence does Germany have
right now on
Israel well unfortunately the influence
is not very strong there is no such
thing like a dependency on delivering
weapons compared with the United States
influence it's really small and given
the current situation in which the netan
government is fighting for survival with
the support of the divided Society in
Israel he probably doesn't care about
trade relations or access to the
European single Market this used to be a
leverage in peace times but at the
moment I don't really see that there is
much leverage so all Schultz can do is
naming and shaming if things go in the
wrong direction and it clearly goes in
the wrong direction because a military
solution a military strategy that is so
short sided that that it doesn't have a
plan what to do afterwards and what the
humanitarian costs of this is is simply
a political loss that will last much
longer than any potential victory that
one can claim like mission accomplished
you say naming and shaming is there do
you think an increasingly unified
position amongst European allies there
have been deep divisions during the
course of this
war well I wouldn't call it a deep
division there are some countries that
simply have more room for maneuver to
openly criticize if things go in the
wrong direction Germany always used a
more diplomatic position they underlined
the right of Israel for self-defense
but they also underlined that it has to
be proportional what Israel is doing and
in a situation in which the most densely
populated part in the whole region is
subject to a massive military attack
there is not much of a proportion not to
speak of a plan B what to do with the
people this is of course a terrible
situation for the Palestinians in the
region but everyone in the wider Middle
East has to ask ask him or herself what
is my contribution to make people less
suffer and not only point the finger at
Israel let me ask you within the context
of of what we're seeing in the Gaza
Strip now what do you make of the aid
promises from Europe we've also been
hearing criticism that this kind of
parallel Aid infrastructure the air
drops the the maritime Corridor is
making to some extent these other
countries complicit in in allowing
Israel to continue its
War
well what would be the alternative to
watch people dying and then writing a
chapter in the history book of a
terrible disaster that keeps going that
we watch people dying because we didn't
do anything so I think this is part of a
package in which the few things the
European Union can do to use diplomatic
initiatives like what yep Morel did a
few days ago to invite the world
community
to put pressure on everyone in the
region to find a two-state solution and
provide as much as possible as
humanitarian Aid with air Bridges with a
delivery from Cyprus and to reach out to
countries in the region to support
people in need this is what counts the
most you say there were no other options
left I mean the other option would have
been to have Israel open the land
borders now the US potentially has the
leverage to do that the European allies
of the US clearly have some influence
there is this basically an
acknowledgement that that Europe has no
influence over over Israel when it comes
to requesting humanitarian
access well as I said in the beginning
The Leverage from the Europeans is very
very limited compared with what the
United States theoretically can do but
Biden is under pressure because his
country is divided between strong
supporters of the Palestinian point of
view and a very strong Jewish lobbying
group and it's an election year so
theoretically he could do much more than
anyone else practically it will fire
back and it will have a high cost if he
only takes one side oric bner there
professor of European studies at
Stanford University in Berlin always
great to get your thoughts and Analysis
on aler thank you for joining us again
or thanks for having me